Abstract - An automatic brake control system using artificial neural network was designed to reduce acceleration from a predetermined speed once it detects an obstacle 250m ahead. Two inputs and one output parameters; position, velocity and brake, were designed using Fuzzy logic toolbox, to develop the car brake controller while Simulink based on back propagation training algorithm was used to train the network. After extensive training, the fuzzy controller was replaced by the neural network controller in the drive system simulation.





OBJECTIVE 
To design a system which controls the speed of vehicle based on driving condition. 
The system will inform the driver about the exceeding speed of vehicle and control it automatically if driver doesn’t respond.

INTRODUCTION:

Safety is a necessary part of man’s life. Due to the accident cases
 reported daily on the major roads in all parts of the developed and 
developing countries, more attention is needed for research in the designing an efficient car driving aiding system. It is expected that if such a device is designed and incorporated into our cars as a road safety device, it will reduce the incidence of accidents on our roads and various premises, with subsequent reduction in loss of life and property. However, a major area of concern of an engineer should be safety, as it concerns the use of his/her inventions and the accompanying dangers due to human limitations. When it comes to the use of a motor vehicle, accidents that have occurred over the years tell us that something needs to be done about them from an engineering point of view. According to the 2007 edition of the Small-M report on the road accident statistic in Malaysia, a total of 6,035 people were killed in 2000 and the fatality spring up to 6,287 in 2006 from accident cases reported in 250,429 and 341,252 cases of accident for 2000 and 2006 respectively. The obtained results show that, high rate of accident is reported each year. 
	
Now it is suffice to say that the implementation of certain highway safety means such as speed restrictions, among others, has done a lot in reducing the rates of these accidents. The issue here is that policies of safe driving alone would not eradicate this, the engineer has a role to play, after all the main issue is an engineering product (the motor vehicle). Many motorists have had 2 to travel through areas with little light under much fatigue, yet compelled to undertake the journey out of necessity. It is not always irresponsible to do this. A lot of cases reported is as a result of drivers sleeping off while driving, and when he/she eventually woke up, a head-on collision might have taken place. Not many have had the fortune to quickly avert this. It is therefore imperative to consider the advantages of an early warning system where the driver is alerted of a possible collision with some considerable amount of time before it occurs. 

Till yet, government implemented the technique of catching the culprit who involved in accident via CCTV footage. This system was efficient in catching the culprit but real loss of life has taken place, the loss that had happened can’t be recovered.
But the system we are designing overcomes all the ill-effects of above mentioned system as it prevent the loss to take place by avoiding accidents. 




In many road accident cases, a major cause of the accident is the
driver distraction and failure to react in time. Advanced system of
auxiliary functions has been developed to help avoid such accident
and minimize the effects of collision in effect.
This was achieved by reducing the total stopping distance through
works done by researchers in the past. Lately some of the works were
used in many car brake system developments deploying electronic brake
control system which has led to significant safety in driving.
Applied a predictive approach to design a non- linear model-based controller
for the wheel slip. The integral feedback technique is also employed
to increase the robustness of the designed controller. Therefore,
 the control law is developed by minimizing the difference between the
 predicted and desired responses of the wheel slip and it’s integral. 




The control scheme consists of PID controller feedback controller.
The studies deployed electronic brake control system and was based on
 a precise mathematical model of the vehicle. But the fact remains that, 
the behaviors of the drivers are mostly based on the experience,
 not the exact mathematical computation. Ordinary cruise control systems
 for passenger cars are becoming obsolete because of the increasing traffic
 density rarely makes it possible to drive at a pre-selected speed. However,
 in order to achieve high customer acceptance, applying artificial neural network
 to intelligent cruise control seems to be an appropriate way to achieve human behavior,
 because driver’s experience can be transformed easily into rules is a way 
out to curb accident, lost of lives and properties on our roads.

One critical component for enabling safe autonomous driving is the autonomous
braking systems which can reduce
the velocity of the vehicle automatically when a threatening
obstacle is detected. The autonomous braking should offer safe
and comfortable brake control without exhibiting too early
or too late braking. Most conventional autonomous braking
systems are rule-based, which designate the specific brake
control protocol for each different situation. Unfortunately, this
approach is limited in handling all scenarios that can happen
in real roads. Hence, the intelligent braking system should
be developed to avoid the accidents in a principled and goal-oriented manner.

Recently, interest in machine learning has explosively grown
up with the rise of parallel computing technology and a
large amount of training data. In particular, the success of
deep neural network (DNN) technique led the researchers to
investigate the application of machine learning for autonomous
driving. The DNN has been applied to autonomous driving
from camera-based perception [4]–[6] to end-to-end approach
which learns mapping from the sensing to the control [7],
[8]. Reinforcement learning (RL) technique has also been
improved significantly as DNN was adopted. The technique,
called deep reinforcement learning (DRL), has shown to
perform reasonably well for various challenging robotics and
control problems. In [9], the DRL technique called Deep Qnetwork (DQN) was proposed, which approximates Q-value
function using DNN. It was shown that the DQN can outperform human experts in various Atari video games. Recently,
the DRL is applied to control systems for autonomous driving
vehicle in [10], [11].


. The agent (vehicle) interacts with the uncertain
environment where the position of the obstacle could change
in time and thus the risk of collision at each time step varies
as well. The agent receives the information of the obstacle’s
position using the sensors and adapts the brake control to the
state change such that the chance of accident is minimized.
In our work, we design the autonomous braking system for
the urban road scenario where a vehicle faces a pedestrian
who crosses the street at a random timing. In order to find
the desirable brake action for the given pedestrian’s location
and vehicle’s speed, we need to allocate appropriate reward
function for each state-action pair. In our work, we focus on
finding the desirable reward function which strikes the balance
between the penalty imposed to the agent when accident
happens and the reward obtained when the vehicle quickly gets
out of risk. Using the reward function we carefully designed,
we train DQN to learn the policy that decides the timing of
brake based on the given pedestrian’s state. We also provide a
new DQN design which can rapidly learn the policy to avoid
rare accidents.



Safety of the vehicle is of prime importance. Safety 
basically focuses on controlling speed and effective 
braking systems. With increase in amount of speed there 
also increases the chances of occurrence of accidents. As 
per the saying, “Speed thrills but kills”, over speed of the 
vehicle can lead to very severe accidents. There is more 
number of accidents that are caused by uncontrollable 
speeding than due to other reasons. Severe accidents 
are caused due to this which can be life threatening as 
well. Prime reasons behind such accidents are either by 
negligence of the driver, or by failure of braking system 
to stop the vehicle in time. Here comes the role of safety 
of the vehicle which reduces severe mishaps. Nowadays 
manufacturers of Cars as well as Motor cycles also count 
on such technologies and equipments which assures 
safety at high speed. The use of proper braking system 
and by controlled speed reduction techniques is the key to 
solve such problems. The use of Anti-lock braking 
system in cars is the current trend to increase safety of the 
car. There are also other solutions like Automatic 
Braking Systems which can be useful as well as helpful.
The purpose of automated car braking system is to develop an automated control system that would maintain a safe driving distance from obstacles while driving. This research work proposes a car braking system that will be controlled by the artificial neural networks to curb road accidents and effectively assure safety and stress free driving.


Automatic braking technologies combine sensors and 
brake controls to help prevent high speed collisions. 
Some automatic braking systems can prevent collisions 
altogether, but most of them are designed to simply 
reduce the speed of a vehicle before it hits something. 
Since high speed crashes are more likely to be fatal than 
low speed collisions, automatic braking systems can save 
lives and reduce the amount of property damage that 
occurs during an accident. Some of these systems provide 
braking assistance to the driver, and others are actually 
capable of activating the brakes with no driver input. 
Each car manufacturer has its own automatic braking 
system technology, but they all rely on some type of 
sensor input. Some of these systems use lasers, others 
use radar, and some even use video data. This sensor 
input is then used to determine if there are any objects 
present in the path of the vehicle. If an object is detected, 
the system can then determine if the speed of the vehicle 
is greater than the speed of the object in front of it. A 
significant speed differential may indicate that a collision 
is likely to occur, in which case the system is capable of 
automatically activating the brakes.


The safety in automobiles can also be ensured by 
introducing A.B.S.C. which stands for Automatic Braking and
Speed Control System on which this system is based. It 
basically controls the speed of the vehicle by 
continuously feeding the vehicle state/ driving atmosphere to 
the pretrained deep neural network as digital image captured by the camera sesnsor.
Smart Display & Control (user interface) or human–machine interface is used for the user attention and 
displays information about the vehicle.

The Neural Network predicts the speed and the amount of braking required.
 The vehicle’s embedded unit automatically alerts the driver, to reduce the 
speed according to the prediction, it waits for few seconds to respond. 
If it doesn't get any input from the user, vehicle’s SDC unit automatically 
commands the microcontroller with desired speed info.

Microcontroller through its logic circuits sends the 
signals to the actuators via its output pins. The actuators 
apply necessary force on the brakes and reduce the speed 
to its safe value. 

The project is composed of three major systems: Sensors(Camera, Wheel encoders),
 Microcontroller and userinterface with embeded computer and Actuators (Stepper Motor) 


The Arduino Uno is a microcontroller board based on the
ATmega328.Arduino has an 8-bit architecture .It acts as 
brain to the system such as CPU of the Computer and 
controls all the actions of the system such as sensing and 
actuating.
The Actuators here are Stepper motors in which output of 
Microcontroller is connected. A stepper motor is a
brushless DC electric motor that divides a full rotation 
into a number of equal steps. The motor's position can 
then be commanded to move and hold at one of these 
steps without any feedback sensor, as long as the motor is 
carefully sized to the application.

Whenever the microcontroller gets the input from the microcomputer
the input from the microcontroller sends a signal to the stepper motors via the 
driver card, and turns it by a certain number of predefined 
steps at a pre defined speed thereby engaging the clutch 
and brake. 
There are two stepper motors, one of 10 Kg-cm torque, 
connected to the clutch, other of 2Kg-cm torque 
connected to the brake lever. 
Both 6-wire motors are running in unipolar mode, driven 
by a single driven by a single driver card. Both centre taps 
are maintained at 12 V potential difference by the 
motorcycle's battery. 
To drive these motors, the microcontroller sends a 
sequential digital signal through its digital ports (here 
pins 8,9,10,11 respectively) which are further connected 
to the stepper motor input wires in the sequence of Blue, 
Green, Red, Orange. During each signal by the 
microcontroller, the stepper motor moves by 1.8 o or 1 
step. 
After the motors turn by the requisite number of turns 
they get locked by the controller. They remain locked 
while the microcontroller again calculates the reduced 
rpm, and till it reaches a value below the set limit. Then, 
the motors retract, thereby disengaging the clutch and 
brake.



Working Steps:

 The proposed work is likely to control the speed of 
vehicle and automatic format braking system.

It is divided 
into three main steps;
 1. Capture the driving atmosphere
 2. Preprocess image and predict speed using DNN.
 3. Automatic braking system.

 The proposed method will automatically inform about 
the hurdle in the path of the vehicle on the display with the 
help of different sensors. Ultrasonic sensors are connected 
in the vehicle to sense the object (Hurdle) and then send 
signals to the controller. The controller takes different 
actions based on these signals in order to create a safe 
environment for the driver. After detecting the obstacle in 
front of the car, we will directly view the distance between 
the car and obstacle on the LED display. When the distance 
between two cars or distance between cars & obstacle is 
very small, means if accidents like situation are detected by 
IR sensor then the automatic braking system is activated.

a) Hurdle Detection 
 The purpose of this part of the proposed method is 
the secure the speed of car or security of driver and vehicle 
against different hurdles. To achieve this target ultrasonic 
sensors are used on front sides of the vehicle. Sensor 
consists of one transmitter and one receiver. The transmitter 
of the sensor will continuously transmit the signals. When 
these signals will collide with any object and will be 
reflected back, the receiver of sensor will catch these 
reflected signals and forward them to the microcontroller. 
To find the object side the signal is send to processing unit 
through different ports. In ultrasonic sensor, the power is 
directly proportional to range of ultrasonic sensor. 
 P ∞ Range
b) Car Speed Controlling System
 The system involves the controlling of speed of 
vehicle through the microcontroller. Different commands 
will send to the ports of controller to control the speed of
vehicle. The microcontroller receives commands which 
show the obstacle in front of the vehicle and output will 
encoded 8 bit value. The input signals will come from 
ultrasonic distance sensor and IR sensors on board the 
vehicle. After analyzing the inputs from the sensors, 
controller maintains the speed of vehicle according to the 
distance from the vehicle.
c) Ultrasonic Hurdle detection Circuit
 The speed of the sound in the dry air is about 340 
m/s. We cannot hear the echo if we send a short ultrasonic 
pulse at 200 KHz in the air but it is possible to detect the 
back pulse with an ultrasonic sensor. If the time of the forth 
& back travel of the ultrasonic wave will known then the 
distance will also known. If we divide the distance by two 
then the range from the ultrasonic sensor to the first hurdle 
in front of it will be known. Here the proposed method also 
uses an ultrasonic piezzo transmitter with its receiver 
because they are very efficient, easy to find and quite cheap. 
In this proposed research, first the pulse will be send, it is 
easy to get a 20 KHz pulse from a PIC PWM output. We 
can drive an ultrasonic transmitter directly from the PIC 
output, but the sense range will not exceed 50 cm. Using a 
transistor and a resonator circuit, the ultrasonic transmitter 
will get around 20 volts to generate 200 KHz pulse and the 
sense range will be extended up to 75 feet.
d) Activation of automatic braking system-
 After the detection of the obstacle in front of the car, 
the distance between car & obstacle directly shows on the 
LED display. Whenever the distance between car & 
obstacle goes to minimum then speed of car also decreases. 
When the distance between two cars or distance between 
cars & obstacle is very small, means if an accident like 
situation is detected by IR sensor then the automatic braking 
system is activated


Braking

1. the reaction distance: seeing, recognizing, and reacting takes time:
The reaction time is the time it takes the driver to notice a threat and then apply the brake. 
If there are no medications, alcohol or other drugs involved, this usually takes a second.
 The metres that the driver covers at a certain speed during this time is the reaction distance. 
It is calculated by the following rule of thumb: 
Reaction distance = (speed ÷ 10) × 3. At a speed of 100 km/h the reaction distance alone is 30 metres.

2. the braking distance: estimate when your vehicle will stop after the start of braking
The braking distance is the distance travelled from the start of braking to the
standstill of the vehicle. In other words: how many metres your motorcycle will travel 
while braking. Without reaction time or reaction distance (see above). 
The following formula has proven to be useful for calculating the braking distance:
(Speed ÷ 10) × (Speed ÷ 10). At a speed of 100 km/h the braking distance is therefore a full 100 metres..

In the case of emergency braking, in which the brake and clutch are pressed simultaneously,
the braking distance is reduced by half again each time. The formula must therefore be added:
 (speed ÷ 10) × (speed ÷ 10) ÷ 2. At our previous starting speed of 100 km/h,
 it takes 50 metres to stop your machine with an emergency stop.

The stopping distance is once again considerably longer than the braking distance.
 It begins when the danger is detected and ends when the vehicle comes to a halt.
 The stopping distance is therefore made up of points 1 and 2 – the reaction distance and the braking distance.
 I must therefore determine and add two partial values (reaction distance + braking distance)
 in order to calculate the required stopping distance.

Expressed in the formula:
 (speed ÷ 10) × (speed ÷ 10) + (speed ÷ 10 × 3).
 For my standard example at 100 km/h,
 the stopping distance under normal braking is 130 metres.





The braking distance is the main factor considered in this 
system. Braking distance for a particular speed is the distance 
between the point of application of the brakes and the point at 
which the vehicle comes to a complete stop from the present 
speed. It is calculated by using following formula. 
Braking Distance = V / 2µg (meter)
Where 
V= Velocity of the vehicle (m/s)
µ = Coefficient of friction of road = 0.8 
g = Acceleration due to gravity = 9.81(m/s2 )
In this formula the condition of brakes and the road 
conditions are not considered for coefficient of friction µ.
Table showing braking distance: 
Velocity (km/hr) Braking Distance (m)
60 17.69
50 12.28
40 7.86
30 4.42
05 0.12
Table 5.2.1 Velocity vs. Braking distance









The stopping distance is the distance travelled between the time when
 the body decides to stop a moving vehicle and the time when the vehicle
 stops completely. The stopping distance depends on factors including road surface,
 and reflexes of the car’s driver and it is denoted by d.



In order to design this project, a system modeling is necessary to provide 
method for the control system. By this, a descriptive model of the system 
as a hypothesis of how the system could work is built. For both controllers, 
the car will be modeled according to the Newton’s second law of motion,

F=ma.

Acceleration is the derivative of velocity y′. y′ is the
derivative of the position, y. Thus, a equals to y′′. Therefore,
the differential equation models the motion of the car as:
Therefore W = Fs
(4)
Acceleration is the derivative of velocity y′. y′ is the
derivative of the position, y. Thus, a equals to y′′. Therefore,
the differential equation models the motion of the car as:

Stopping Distance formula is given by,
d = v^2/(2*mu*g)

Where,
d = stopping distance (m)
v = velocity (m/s)
μ = friction coefficient
g = acceleration due to gravity

The stopping distance formula is also given by,
d = kv^2
Where,
k = a constant of proportionality
v = velocity


Braking Force required to stop car,
Work done by the brake = Amount of K.E reduced
Braking Force * Braking Distance = Amount of K.E reduced
F*d  =  Final K.E - Initial K.E
F*d  =  ((1/2)*m*v_2^2 - (1/2)*m*v_1^2)
F    =   ((1/2)*m*v_2^2 - (1/2)*m*v_1^2)/d




We have presented the new autonomous braking system
based on the deep reinforcement learning. The proposed
system learns an intelligent way of brake control from the
experiences obtained under the simulated environment. We
designed the autonomous braking systems using the DQN
method with carefully designed reward function and enhanced
stability of learning process by modifying the structure of
the DQN. We showed through computer simulations that the
proposed autonomous braking system exhibits desirable and
consistent brake control behavior for various scenarios where
behavior of the pedestrian is uncertain





Case 1: Traditional Brake System
The average mechanical braking time, which is required to reduce the vehicle speed about 10km/h 
mechanically, equals to 0.62 s, and the average time of the driver's perception time and reaction time equals to 
2.54 s, the time needed to the total reduction equals to 3.16 s [18].
Case 2: Automatic Brake System without the effect of injectors
After adding this system to the vehicle and connecting it to both: the injection system and the brake system, the 
process of reducing speed becomes faster because it does not require any follow-up of the driver. The time 
required receiving a signal by GPS ranges between 0.6 to 0.9 s, and it varies depending on the communications 
network in the area. The full process is performed before the arrival of the vehicle into the street and then the 
vehicle will not exceed the upper speed limit in the street; this because of the pre- programming of the system 
and the high accuracy of the GPS that make the process begins before it reaches the street. 
The total time required to reduce speed using vehicle speed control system can be calculated by the following 
equation:
t total = t GPS + + t inject ors + t stepper + t braking (2) 
Where,
t total : the total time of deceleration
t GPS : the time needed by the GPS to receive the signal.
t injectors : the time needed by the microcontroller to close the injectors.
t stepper : the time needed by the microcontroller to fulfill the task of the stepper motor.
Vehicle Speed Control Equipped with Special Combinations, Brake System and Safe Distance 
International organization of Scientific Research 48 | P a g e
t braking : the braking time with injection system control.
According to the experiments performed in the laboratories of the Northern Border University the time that the 
GPS takes to determine the position and send it to the control unit equals to 0.66 s, the time required to close 
injectors is 0.21 seconds, and the time required to apply brake system by a stepper motor is 0.15 s.
So the time required to analyze the signal and begin the process of reduction is equal to 1.02 s.
The mechanical braking time is the same in all cases which equals 0.62 s. So the total time required for 
decreasing speed such10 Km/h does not exceed 1.64 s.
Case 3: Injector's Effect
Closing injectors increases the efficiency of the system because it works to prevent the flow of fuel and arrival it 
to the cylinders, therefore, the time required to reduce speed will be decreased.
In this system, there is an automatic braking system controlled by a stepper motor circuit in a time was 
calculated previously which was 1.64 s. So actually the time required to reduce the speed 10 km/h must be less 
than 1.64 s because of the involvement of injectors in the process which increases the efficiency of the braking 
process. 
According to experiment readings, the time required to reduce the vehicle speed such 10 km / h by closing 
injectors only can be calculated by the following equations [19]:
v2= v1 - a ∆t (3) 
(v2)² = (v1)² - 2 a ∆s (4) 
Where,
V1: initial velocity (Km/h).
V2: final velocity.
∆t: taken time.
∆S: traveled distance.
a: deceleration
When the vehicle is operated on the empty load -ideal speed during a movement on a straight road and the fuel 
has been cut off, it continued travelling 577.5 meter before stopping completely(v2=0) [20] . By compensating 
v1 as 70 Km/h, v2 as 0, and ∆S as 577.5 meter in equation 5, the deceleration will be equal to 4.24 m/s².
If the time required in the mechanical braking process to reduce speed 10 km / h is equal to 0.62 s, and the time 
required to be reduced by shutting injectors only is 2.358 s, the ratio between the effect of injectors and a 
mechanical braking effect will be 26.3 %. 
This means that the vehicle decelerates in rate of 4.24 m/s² and the effect of injectors is 26.3 % of the total of 
deceleration. In other words, the effect of injectors is equal to 0.263 of the influence of mechanical braking. 
The time required for mechanical braking equals to 0.62 - (0.62 *0.263) = 0,457 s. So the total time (with the 
effect of injectors) = 1.02 + 0.457 = 1.477 s.
SAFE DISTANCE EXPERIMENTS AND CALCULATIONS
In some countries such as the UAE, an instant violation is imposed for not leaving enough distance between 
vehicles. The director of Dubai police stated "vehicles travels on a speed of 40 km/h have to leave a distance of 
35 meters which is equivalent to seven cars‟ he added „and when a vehicle‟s speed is 120 km/h a distance of 104 
meters have to be kept"[21]. 
The safety distance is calculated by multiplying the tenth of the speed indicator with 6. Meaning, if a car travels 
on a speed of 40 km/h, the safety distance must not be less than 24 meters. We adopted this rule in calculating 
the safety distance for each speed from 10 to 180 (Km/h), assuming that the following vehicle will stop in any 
moment (figure 11).
If the deceleration rate of the vehicle varies, the safe distance between vehicles depends on the speed will vary. 
It is calculated by the following equation [22]: 
S= v δ+ v2
/2 df - v
2
/2 df + N L+ x0 (5) 
Where:
v = initial speed of two vehicles
dl = deceleration rate of the leading vehicle
df = deceleration rate of the following vehicle
δ= perception-reaction time of the following vehicle
x0 = safety margin after stop
L = length of vehicle
N = number of vehicles in a trai




